---
layout: post
author: boots
---

The Mighty Mitochondria

## preface

During my spring semester of grad school, I was able to take a bioinformatics class thanks to the insistence of my classmates. One of the assignments we all had throughout the semester was to write a blog post on something we covered in the week. I took the first week's blog post. I don't have a background in this, but I do have an interest. So... I wrote about genetics, science, and biology in science fiction and fiction.

The post below was originally posted at my professor's [Medium](https://medium.com/mittalbioinformatics/the-mighty-mitochondria-f872ef8ac690) page, but he's currently working on a new page.

---

Something that I’ve noticed is the portrayal of science in fiction and science fiction. Whether it is in creating a dinosaur from a mosquito stuck in amber or building a time machine to witness 30 million years into the future, or portraying a grim dystopian not-too-distant future… there is science. One could even describe it as “fake science”. But I digress. I propose to limit the focus for this to be the fiction and science fiction stories set in a “modern” world with limits: no laser swords, no teleportation, limited space travel, that sort of thing. By “modern”, I mean relative to the time the story was written.

Science in fiction can be grossly misrepresented. Facial recognition takes time, high doses of radiation causes cancer not superpowers, dinosaur ≠ ostrich egg + amphibian DNA + trace of Dino in amber… you get the picture. That said, science fiction is often based in the reality of the day it was written in. One of the influences for Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein was learning from the scientific and philosophic greats of that time. Luigi Galvani was one of those scientists. He (and his wife) found out that the muscles of a dead animal (frogs) would twitch when given an electric shock. Doctor Hideaki Sena, the author of Japanese science fiction/horror novel Parasite Eve (which I’ll discuss later), studied pharmacology and currently lectures on microbiology. His inspiration for the novel came from a mixture of drug-testing mitochondria at his day job. Even Michael Crichton’s final novel Next (excluding posthumously releases), one of the plot threads involves a biotech corporation patenting and owning one of their patent’s cells, which is upheld in a court of law. After losing the cells due to tampering (another plot thread), the corporation’s lawyers say that they are fully within their rights to bring the man whose cells they own back… his or his daughter’s or his grandson’s. Far fetched as that may sound, especially for a book published in late 2006, there is some truth to it. In the 1990s, a company called Myriad Genetics filed and was awarded two patents on genes. BRCA1 and BRCA2. To put it bluntly, they are tumor suppressor genes that, if not properly repaired after a mutation, can cause an increased risk for breast cancer. And Myriad Genetics owned a patent on those two genes. This meant that they were the only ones who could offer screenings for those genes, their “BRACAnalysis” took their small startup company to a publicly traded company with about $500 million in revenue. They sent cease-and-desist letters to anyone testing patients for BRCA. This went on for nearly 20 years. It wasn’t until 2013 when the Supreme Court finally struck down the patent. Judge Clarence Thomas, who delivered the majority opinion, stated that, “A naturally occurring DNA segment is a product of nature and not patent eligible merely because it has been isolated…” I’m sure that Crichton, who had died in 2008, would have been pleased to hear this decision.

But enough about writing. Let’s talk science and fiction. Specifically, the mitochondria, endosymbiotic theory, and Parasite Eve. It’s no exaggeration to state that the general purpose of the mitochondria has become a meme. “The mitochondria is the powerhouse of the cell” is what most people remember from the long distant days of their high school biology class. Until recently, common thought was that the mitochondria was passed down matrilineally. Meaning that everyone gets their mom’s mitochondria. Though now there is evidence that it is possible to inherit mitochondria from one’s father, though very rarely. But for a moment, forget the occasional Mitochondrial Adam, and focus on Mitochondrial Eve, the theorized common female ancestor with whom we all could trace our mitochondria to. Now, let’s talk Endosymbiosis: it’s essentially a mutualistic relationship between any organism that lives within another. The mitochondria are an example of such a thing. They came to be through symbiogenesis, or endosymbiotic theory. The theory goes that organelles like the mitochondria were originally bacteria that were consumed by eukaryotic cells. With these few things in mind, let’s talk Parasite Eve. I’m still reading an English translation of the novel, but I’ve read a synopsis. At the time the story was published in 1995, matrilineal inheritance of the mitochondria was known. The story opens with a woman suddenly losing her sight while driving, as well as her senses, with an odd sense of something going on inside of her, only to regain her senses just as she is about to crash into a telephone pole. The reason for the crash and loss of sense? Her mitochondria. They are actually an intelligent conscious being known as Eve. There’s more to it than that, but I don’t want to give it all away. But Eve is able to control her host’s mitochondria as well as influence those of others. While the woman driving survives, she’s rendered brain dead and her husband (a biological researcher) is influenced by her to harvest some of her cells and to donate one of her kidneys (alongside her influencing another doctor) to a young girl. The kidney, which belonged to Eve’s host, is also by that extension a part of Eve. The reasoning for this is to eventually give birth to a child that can change and control its own genetic code and to give mitochondrial life its ultimate potential to dominate eukaryotic life. Far fetched and crazy sounding, yes. Impossible? I’d assume so. I don’t think that mitochondria can influence other mitochondria to cause someone to spontaneously combust, or to do or say or act in certain ways. But it is grounded in the science of the day. Grounded enough to work with the story. This is where science and science fiction deviate. Science is evidence-based and requires honest experimentation, documentation, reproducibility, and study. Science fiction is fiction, but with aspects of science incorporated into it. A science fiction novel is not a peer-reviewed journal article in Nature, but an editor-reviewed novel published by a publisher. That said, a science-fiction novel may reference a peer-reviewed journal article from Nature as a source for reference.

In conclusion, what’s my point? Who cares. I’m not a scientist, nor have I played one on television. But I am a writer who is interested in science. Historically, a lot of good science fiction draws on the science of the day to tell a story. That story, while it wouldn’t make it through a cursory glance to be published in a scientific journal, may paint a picture or tell a tale of what-if, that makes one ponder.
